# Anti-fascist unity in ideological diversity

## Abstract

Militant anti-fascism, where it has worked (i.e. not Weimar) has always had to manage coalitions of ideologically diverse tendencies. Today the radical left is riven by friction between classical materialist, radical liberal and post-classical materialist tendencies. These are meta-ideological tendencies to the extent they transcend more lineal categorisations, such as Marxist or anarchist, for e.g. This paper will briefly outline a provisional schema for defining these categories in relation to the five reference points of class, class interest, ideology, social relations and the base/superstructure model. Then go on to discuss how best to manage the inevitable tensions between groups embodying them in a militant anti-fascist context

## A brief timeline of meta-ideological development

Before I outline a synchronic theoretical schema I think it's helpful to throw out a brief sketch of the diachronic historical timeline of how the categories I'm using - classical materialism, radical liberalism, post-classical materialism - emerged in sequence and in reaction to each other.

Skipping through most of the long 19th century, I posit the beginning of the sequence as a period of "classical materialism" from the 1880s to 1933, overlapping to some extent with the rise of the period of "vulgar materialism" coming from the Comintern from the later 1920s onwards and lasting until the 1950s. 

In the 1950s and 60s, the hegemony of official Comintern vulgar Marxist ideology was broken by the death of Stalin, Khrushchev's secret speech and "revisionism", and the subsequent crushing of the 1956 Hungarian uprising. In reaction to these events and the parlous theoretical state of vulgar materialism some reacted by trying to recover the intellectual credibility (and dignity) of pre-vulgarisation classical materialism - these tendencies we can call "neo-classical" (Althusser, Analytical Marxism). Others, the by questioning the limitations of classical materialism itself and going beyond its limitations in one way or another - hence "post-classical" - while still remaining within the broad tradition of historical materialism (albeit in "heterodox" revisions of that concept). Others yet still by abandoning the strictures of "the materialist conception of history", through post-structuralism, dual- and triple-system feminisms and intersectionality, to a new "radical liberal" social ontology. 

This latter tendency, which merged with the earlier departure from classical materialism represented by the Frankfurt School and Critical theory, rapidly gained doctrinal hegemony in the academic institutions of North America and Western Europe. The revival of interest in Marxism (and to a lesser extent, social anarchism) in the wake of the 2008 global financial crash has resulted in a revival of interest in the various, mostly doomed, neoclassical inquiries of the 1970s (from Althusser, to Analytical Marxism, etc), moreso in the various post-classical tendencies (Political Marxism, operaist/autonomist Marxism, Birmingham School, NML, etc). But also, by reaction, in a revival of a "neo-vulgar" materialism that rejects both alternative approaches as either failed experiments (neo-classicism) or bourgeois deviations into liberalism *tout court* and so-called identity politics, castigated as "idpol" (radical liberal). A wide-spectrum anathema that actually takes in much of Marxist thought since the 1930s, never mind any other tendencies like feminism or black radicalism. Post-classical tendencies are either ignored entirely or amalgamated with radical liberalism.
## Schema

Having raced through a diachronic account and thrown in some names of different tendencies for illustration, I'm now going to outline a more concept-centred schema based on the relations between class, class interests, ideology, base and superstructure and forces and relations of production as a basis for differentiating the three main meta-ideological groupings or families, as I see it. This is again, of necessity, a brief sketch. 

The classical materialist schema is that class-in-itself determines class interests, in a direct, unmediated way. Further, that class interests then determine class ideologies. Class ideologies can therefore be "correct" in the sense of truly reflecting the objective interests of the class-in-itself, or a "false consciousness" imposed upon it by the ruling capitalist class by means of social domination. The circularity of this extreme functionalist view of ideology and the paradoxical idealism of false consciousness as a historical factor is not dealt with. The development of the forces of production is seen as the independent motor of history driving it to its teleological goal. The relations of production, as well as the ideological superstructure and all other social phenomena are the results of the level of development of the forces of production. 

The post-classical schema is that the movement from class-in-itself to class-for-itself is a matter of political composition, which is effected, inter alia, by a class ideology which posits common interests. In other words that class interests are always-already mediated by a politically composing class ideology. The development of the forces of production is no longer seen as an apolitical "objectively good" motor of historical development, but a strategic tool in the class struggle between capital and labour. The evolution of the relations of production is seen as being contingent on the historical outcomes of class struggle and that these dialectically shape - whether by limiting or liberating - the development of the forces of production. The position on the base/superstructure question is, by contrast, at best underdeveloped. 

The radical liberal position is that ideology is productive of class identities - and that of other groups (gender, race, etc) - and social relations of domination between them, directly. And free from any material determination from class-in-itself (or sex-in-itself or race-in-itself - categories which are taken to be socially constructed with little or no independent material grounds). Material exploitation exists, and is a motivation factor in the development and exercise of ideological oppression. But relations of production are reduced to relations of domination and the historical dialectic between relations of production and forces of production disappears entirely. As does any distinction between base and superstructure.

It's important to note a terminological problem or confusion with the name "radical liberalism" which implies that the tendency issues out of liberalism itself and thus enters the radical left ideological space between classical and post-classical materialisms as an external interloper. I argue that a close reading of the actual development of this meta-ideological tendency within moments like the feminist dual systems debate or discussions of the relation of Marxism with the black radical tradition, show that this tendency actually originates as an immanent critique of the limitations of classical materialism just as much as the post-classical family. Obviously that's a controversial position (especially to the neo-vulgarian wing of the classical family) but I maintain that the role of ideology vis a vis class and other social groupings, the rejection of the base/superstructure dyad and so on, place radical liberalism 'inside and against' the historical materialist problematic rather than that of classical liberalism. A more accurate name might be polycratic materialism given the centrality of multiple dimensions of social oppression and domination. But I think we're stuck with the existing label, for better or worse. Not least because the strong position of this tendency (mainly through the Frankfurt School legacy) in the academy in bringing people into the radical left from actual liberal backgrounds in a way that tends to muddy the water between the two historical ideological camps of liberalism and socialism.

## Principles for cooperation across the meta-idologogical divide

### Not just an ethical or conduct question

There's an odd inconsistency in a lot of left practice between on the one hand treating ideology, doctrine and "right-thinking" orthodoxy as a matter of life and death in the revolutionary struggle. And on the other, of treating the challenge of managing real ideological differences between participants in any meeting or collective process as a matter of simple ethics and good manners. Leftists appeal to "comradeliness" a bit like the colonial elites of yesteryear appealed to "gentlemanliness". Treating ideological differences as simply a matter of manners, of knowing how to behave in polite company, undermines the seriousness of any and all political stances. Worse, it often leaves newly engaged militants, particularly from non-college educated backgrounds, unfamiliar with "debate club" etiquette, with the impression that there's something insincere or hypocritical about leftist organisations attitude towards political positions. In summary, the first principle for cooperation across ideological divides in general, is to address them seriously, in their own right, rather than reduce them to a code of conduct or safer spaces policy.

The other principles outlined here break down into two broad categories. The first is practical considerations or guidelines around rhetorical discipline. The second is to do with more general theoretical considerations that can inform strategies for diffusing or deconstructing antagonist position taking, when and where that arises in the organising process.
### Nobody owns anti-fascism

"Nobody owns anti-fascism" was one of the founding principles when we set up Leeds Anti-Fascist Action in 1986. It was based on the hard-gained experiences of members who'd lived through the disintegration of the original Anti-Nazi League in the early 80s. In a nutshell, it dismisses all arguments between various anti-fascist constituencies, be they anti-racists, feminists, Jewish, trade unionists, socialists, LGBT+ rights activists, etc, that their particular group has either historical precedence or is most at risk or targeted by the enemy, means that they have ownership of the issue and can dictate terms of engagement and strategic line to other groups. The only viable alternative, from a non-ownership approach, is to accept the equal validity of all diverse groups reasons for wanting to defend themselves against the fascist threat. By forestalling fruitless competition over who gets to lead and control, we can move onto the more productive terrain of cooperation on the basis of respect for our diversity and differences. Including, crucially, ideological diversity. Claiming a privileged role for directing or overriding the general consensus on the grounds of superiority of ones own ideological position is not only a violation of the non-ownership principle but pragmatically self-defeating for a movement that needs to engage the maximum numbers of ordinary people motivated to fight fascism beyond any wider ideological commitments.  

### Anti-scholasticism - the practice of praxis

Marx's second thesis on Feuerbach states

> "The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking is not a question of theory but is a practical question. Man must prove the truth — i.e. the reality and power, the this-sidedness of his thinking in practice. The dispute over the reality or non-reality of thinking that is isolated from practice is a purely _scholastic_ question"

In practical organising movements like anti-fascism, the tendency of adherents of the doctrinaire left to veer off into tangents of disputes about ideas, principles and positions *that have no practical impact on the matter at hand*, must be firmly resisted. That doesn't necessarily mean quoting the Theses or using the term scholasticism itself. So long as the difference between discussions with a practical outcome or ask are always clearly distinguished from those that don't.

This is not to say that questions about wider issues such as your geopolitical stance on the Russo-Ukrainian war don't have importance in other contexts. We are not talking about scholasticism as in the medieval disputations about how many angels can dance on the head of a pin. But in the context of deciding what to do about the fash presence at an anti-migrant protest outside a hotel in your neighbourhood, is it a deal-breaker in who you work with? That is the practical question.

### No Shibboleths or loyalty tests

It is an unfortunate reality that while disputes over principles and tactics arise organically within any self-organising process, on occasion individuals or groups manipulate or even initiate such disputes instrumentally, as power plays. This commonly takes the form of identifying a fetish idea or principle that can be used as a loyalty test to see which participants in the collective are open to your influence and willing to take your direction. The use of such loyalty tests, deliberately provocative wedge issues or ideological shibboleths needs to be watched out for and challenged appropriately.

In the name of not deliberately antagonising participants from ideological and meta-ideological positions it would be useful to get agreement on a wee bit of discipline about not using common pejorative labels such as "tankie", "trot", etc. The common use by many leftists of "liberal" as a swear word needs to go, as does similar use of "class reductionist". It's not necessary to make a list of all the pejoratives so long as the need to avoid intentional offence and needling is accepted. 

On that note, terms like vulgar and neo-vulgar materialist that I've used in this paper could obviously be considered uncomplimentary or an affront, so in cooperative discussion it's best to stick to the more value-neutral classical materialist.

Militant anti-fascist groups are voluntary associations of people willing to confront some of the most violent and hateful elements of society by putting their own bodies on the line and taking direct action. In that context, pseudo-bureaucratic demands for policies, procedures or other contrivances appropriate to corporate HR departments or university administrations are entirely out of place. In general all discourse that has the effect, whether by accident or design, to make non-college educated working class militants feel that they are in the wrong place or don't belong in the meeting needs to be repressed with a minimum of fuss.

Theoretical considerations
### Other materialisms are available

One of the most common flashpoints in mixed ideological contexts is the common insistence that my materialism is the only real one, and everyone else's is idealism. The various strands of classical materialism are fairly prone to this gambit, but radical liberals also call out 'class reductionists' for ignoring the material hardships and oppressions faced by women, people of colour, etc.

In reality this charge or gambit is at best nowhere near as clearcut as people seem to think, and at worst utterly groundless. Numerous advocates of neo-vulgar materialist positions openly claim that false consciousness - specifically radical liberalism - is the main barrier between the working class and revolution. Which is an idealist position despite posing, ironically, as a defence of materialism. Contrariwise, there are causative accounts re Trumpism in the US, for eg, from a broadly radical liberal outlook that could easily be categorised as technological determinism (cf Ganz/Riley on social media triggering a Gramsician crisis of hegemony).

By contrast the discourses we see on the far right for a rejection of materialism, return to spiritual values and ethno-nationalist ideals, are very overt in their idealism, precisely because broadly materialist attitudes permeate contemporary discourse. Overall the whole shtick of "my opponents are idealists masquerading as materialists" is pointless and generally falls foul of the principles against scholastic questions and finger pointing in general.

### The base/superstructure construction is wobbly - it needs work

Despite the starring role the base/superstructure distinction plays in the 1859 Preface (made famous by Bernstein's attempted revision, lest we forget) it has progressively fallen out of use in the discourse pretty much across the board in all the different meta-ideological families. The radical liberals at least reject it openly, in favour of their polycentric ontology of an unspecified multiplicity of powers. In the classical era of the orthodox counter-offensive to the Bernsteinian heresy, it was loudly asserted despite not originally appearing in either the manifesto or Kautsky's Erfurt programme commentary (the two main pedagogic references of the SPD as mass party). Yet no one could really clarify what it meant. In practice because the classical tradition asserts the unmediated hard determinism of the base and the productive forces, no room is left for the superstructure as anything other than a mere reflection or projection, like the shadows on the wall of Plato's cave. Modern re-statements of neo-vulgar materialist faith like Vivek Chibber's piece [^1] in Jacobin fail to mention the base/superstructure distinction at all.

The post-classical family would seem to be best placed to find a middle road between classical monism and radical liberal polycracy, but in practice there has been little enthusiasm in taking up the task of reworking historical materialism's original dualist ontology. Partly we can put this down to Althusser's failures, the abandonment of the historical materialist framework by many of the post-autonomists, the dislike of Marxist historians for such apparently abstract formulations. I personally think the ambiguity of Gramsci's legacy, who invested more work into theorising the superstructure and base relation than most of his contemporaries, has so far acted as a barrier to further theoretical progress. This is, in my opinion, an area requiring further work if the post-classical family of ideological and theoretical tendencies is to consolidate a third alternative to the current predominance of the classical materialist and radical liberal confrontation, rather than its current state as a collection of disconnected theoretical fragmented and partial tendencies.

### Last, but not least - don't be a dick

Although I started with a caution against treating sources of ideological friction and the challenge of managing them as a purely ethical problem, I still can't leave the discussion without some mention of the ethical dimension. In modern times the hippocratic oath was summarised as "primum non nocere" : first of all do no harm. In organising we could translate that as "first of all, don't be a dick"

----
## Notes

[^1]: "Materialism is Essential for Socialist Politics", Vivek Chibber, Jacobin, May 2025. https://jacobin.com/2025/05/materialism-socialism-democracy-left-wing.
